>> Thompson: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, MAY 7: THE IMPACT OF
THE HUGE AND STILL GROWING
WILDFIRE THAT HAS ENGULFED A
WHOLE TOWN IN CANADA; LONDON
ELECTS ITS FIRST MUSLIM MAYOR;
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, AN
UNCONVENTIONAL PROGRAM THAT PAYS
AT-RISK YOUNG MEN TO STAY OUT OF
TROUBLE AND AWAY FROM GUNS.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS OF
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
MEGAN THOMPSON.
>> Thompson: GOOD EVENING, AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE RAGING WILDFIRE THAT HAS
FORCED 90,000 PEOPLE TO EVACUATE
THEIR HOMETOWN IN CANADA HAS NOW
SPREAD ACROSS 600 SQUARE MILES
AND IS STILL GROWING.
THE BLAZE BEGAN SIX DAYS AGO IN
FORT McMURRAY, IN THE CANADIAN
PROVINCE OF ALBERTA, 200 MILES
NORTH OF EDMONTON.
ALBERTA'S PREMIER SAID TODAY THE
FIRE IS "OUT OF CONTROL," BUT NO
OTHER COMMUNITY LIES IN ITS
PATH.
500 FIREFIGHTERS ARE WORKING TO
CONTAIN A FIRE FANNED BY HIGH
WINDS AND FEEDING ON DRY FOREST.
MANY FORT McMURRAY RESIDENTS
WORKED IN A NEARBY TAR SANDS OIL
EXTRACTION PROJECT.
THEIR NEIGHBORHOODS ARE CHARRED
RUINS, 1,600 STRUCTURES HAVING
BURNED DOWN.
THOUSANDS OF EVACUEES HAVE BEEN
AIRLIFTED TO SHELTERS IN
EDMONTON, BUT MOST LEFT IN SLOW-
MOVING CONVOYS OF CARS.
FOR MORE ON THE FORT McMURRAY
WILDFIRE, "NEW YORK TIMES"
REPORTER IAN AUSTEN JOINS ME BY
SKYPE FROM EDMONTON, ALBERTA.
IAN, YOU'VE BEEN TALKING TO SOME
OF THE FAMILIES WHO HAVE BEEN
EVACUATED TO EDMONTON, CAN YOU
TELL ME WHAT HAS THIS DISASTER
BEEN LIKE FOR THEM?
>> WELL, THE FIRE CAME IN VERY,
VERY QUICKLY ON TUESDAY.
AND EVERYONE, YOU HEAR THE SAME
STORY OVER AND OVER.
I WAS OUT WALKING MY DOG IN THE
MORNING.
IT WAS BEAUTIFUL IN THE DOG
PARK.
AND THEN I SAW SMOKE AND FLAMES.
SO PEOPLE JUST BASICALLY CHUCKED
MAYBE A PHOTO ALBUM, A CHANGE OF
UNDERWEAR IN THEIR CAR AND FLED
INTO THESE HUGE TRAFFIC JAMS.
SEVERAL THOUSAND PEOPLE GOT CUT
OFF TO THE SOUTH WHERE EDMONTON,
CALGARY THE BIG CITIES ARE
AND WENT NORTH WHERE THERE IS
ROADS TO NOWHERE.
BEYOND THERE IS THE NORTH POLE,
EVENTUALLY.
THEY DON'T KNOW IF THEY HAVE A
HOME.
JOB.
THEY DON'T KNOW WHAT THERE IS TO
GO BACK TO.
AND YOU KNOW, THEY HAVE BEEN
TOLD THAT THEY MAY BE HERE FOR
WEEKS AND WEEKS BEFORE THEY ARE
ALLOWED TO RETURN TO WHATEVER
AWAITS THEM THERE.
>> AND WHAT IS THE PLAN, IF
THERE IS ANY, TO ACCOMMODATE ALL
OF THEM BOTH SHORT AND
LONG-TERM?
>> IT HASN'T MOVED TO THE
LONG-TERM PHASE YET.
I MEAN OBVIOUSLY A LOT OF PEOPLE
HAVE GONE TO FRIENDS AND FAMILY.
FORT McMURRAY WAS
DISPROPORTIONATELY POPULATED BY
PEOPLE FROM ATLANTIC CANADA
WHICH IS AN AREA OF HIGH
UNEMPLOYMENT.
SOME OF THOSE PEOPLE ARE GOING
BACK TO NOVA SCOTIA,
NEWFOUNDLAND, WHEREVER.
EVERY HOTEL AROUND ME HERE IN
DOWNTOWN EDMONTON, WHEN YOU GO
THROUGH THE LOBBY, THERE ARE
DOZENS AND DOZENS OF PEOPLE
WHO ARE EVACUEES.
I WAS AT THE MOSQUE LAST NIGHT
THAT HAD A HUNDRED PEOPLE IN THE
BASEMENT.
HERE IN EDMONTON, A MASSIVE
BUILDING ON THE EXHIBITION
GROUNDS HAS ABOUT 4,500 COTS.
INSURANCE COMPANIES ARE THERE,
TEMPORARY BANKS.
THEY EVEN HAVE A VETERINARY
FACILITY FOR EVERYONE'S DOGS AND
CATS.
>> ALBERTA EXPERIENCED AN
UNUSUALLY DRY AND WARM WINTER,
PRECIPITATION WAS HALF THE NORM,
SNOW MELTED EARLY.
HOW DID THOSE CONDITIONS AFFECT
THE FIRE?
>> THIS PLACE IS NO STRANGER TO
BIG FIRES BUT GENERALLY SPEAKING
BIG FIRES HERE ARE DRIVEN BY
WINDS, YOU KNOW, THE OBVIOUS
THING, FUELING WITH OXYGEN.
THE DRYNESS THIS TIME THOUGH HAS
MEANT THAT THE BLACK SPRUCE, THE
PREDOMINANT TREE UP THERE IN
THE FOREST, THEY JUST TURNED
INTO THE IDEAL FUEL SOURCE FOR
A FIRE.
THE FIRE IS SO HOT AND SO
INTENSE IT CAN THROW FLAMING
PROJECTILES MILES AHEAD OF
ITSELF TO GET A LOGGERHEAD
FURTHER FORWARD, AND IT'S EVEN
NOW CREATING ITS OWN LIGHTNING
IN THE SOOT, WHICH IS STARTING
LIGHTNING FIRES WHICH IT JOINS
UP WITH.
>> YOU SPENT TIME IN FORT
McMURRAY REPORTING ON THE
THE ECONOMIC SITUATION UP THERE
AS A TOWN BUILT AROUND OIL
PRODUCTION.
CAN YOU TALK A LITTLE BIT ABOUT
WHAT THE ECONOMIC SITUATION HAS
BEEN AND HOW THIS FIRE MIGHT
AFFECT IT LONG-TERM.
>> FORT McMURRAY IS THE CENTER
OF THE VERY CONTROVERSIAL OIL
SANDS PROJECTS.
BUT THOSE PROJECTS ARE WELL
NORTH OF THE CITY.
INCREASINGLY THE WORKERS WHO
WORKED ON THOSE PROJECTS LIVED
IN COMPANY-OWNED CAMPS WHICH IS
WHERE PEOPLE EVACUATED TO THIS
WEEK.
THE PEOPLE IN THE CITY, YOU
KNOW, THERE'S OBVIOUSLY
EXCEPTIONS, THEY TENDED TO WORK
FOR COMPANIES THAT WERE
SUPPLIERS TO THE INDUSTRY.
AND WHEN THE OIL PRICE COLLAPSE
CAME IN EARLY LAST YEAR, THESE
WERE THE FIRST PEOPLE TO BE LAID
OFF.
SO THIS CREATES AN INTERESTING
DYNAMIC.
A CITY OF 90,000 PEOPLE NOW, OR
HAD A CITY OF 90,000 PEOPLE THAT
GREW RAPIDLY IN THIS DECADE.
WHEN YOU LOOK AT THE PROJECTIONS
FOR OIL PRICES INTO THE FUTURE--
AND OIL SANDS OIL IS A VERY
EXPENSIVE KIND OF OIL--
YOU WONDER IF THERE IS
GOING TO BE A NEED TO REBUILD
THE CITY THAT SIZE GOING
FORWARD.
>> IAN AUSTEN OF "THE NEW YORK
TIMES," THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR
BEING WITH US.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Thompson: IN SYRIA, A FRAGILE
CEASE-FIRE IN THE DIVIDED CITY
OF ALEPPO HAS BEEN EXTENDED FOR
ANOTHER THREE DAYS.
RUSSIA, WHICH BACKS THE REGIME
OF SYRIAN PRESIDENT BASHAR AL-
ASSAD IN HIS FIGHT AGAINST REBEL
GROUPS, ANNOUNCED THE EXTENSION
OF THE CEASE-FIRE THAT BEGAN ON
WEDNESDAY.
THE SYRIAN OBSERVATORY FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS SAYS ALEPPO IS
RELATIVELY QUIET.
SEPARATELY, THE U.S. MILITARY
SAID TODAY IT HAD CARRIED OUT
THREE AIR STRIKES ON ISIS
COMMAND AND CONTROL CENTERS
INSIDE SYRIA.
NEITHER ISIS NOR AL QAEDA
MILITANTS ARE SUBJECT TO THE
CEASE-FIRE.
NORTH KOREA'S RULING WORKERS'
PARTY CONGRESS, ITS FIRST SUCH
MEETING IN 36 YEARS, ENTERED ITS
SECOND DAY TODAY.
IN A SIGN RULER KIM JONG UN HAS
CONSOLIDATED HIS POWER,
DELEGATES ARE EXPECTED TO CONFER
ON HIM THE PARTY'S TOP TITLE OF
"GENERAL SECRETARY," THE SAME
TITLE HELD BY HIS FATHER AND
GRANDFATHER.
KIM WASN'T EVEN BORN WHEN THE
LAST CONGRESS WAS HELD IN 1980.
KIM RECEIVED A STANDING OVATION
FROM 3,400 OFFICIALS AND
DELEGATES YESTERDAY WHEN HE
SPOKE ABOUT JANUARY'S HYDROGEN
BOMB TEST, THE COUNTRY'S FOURTH
NUCLEAR WEAPONS TEST.
FOREIGN JOURNALISTS INVITED TO
COVER THE CONGRESS WERE NOT
ALLOWED INSIDE THE HALL BUT WERE
ALLOWED TO SEE THE UNVEILING OF
PYONGYANG'S NEW, FOUR-CAR SUBWAY
TRAIN.
STATE MEDIA SAID IT WAS BUILT
WITH NORTH KOREAN TECHNOLOGY.
PRESIDENT OBAMA TODAY TOLD
GRADUATES AT HOWARD UNIVERSITY,
A HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGE,
THEY NEED TO VOTE THIS YEAR.
HE SAID IN HIS 2012 REELECTION,
TWO-THIRDS OF BLACK VOTERS
TURNED OUT, BUT ONLY 40% DID IN
THE 2014 MIDTERMS.
>> YOU DON'T THINK THAT MADE A
DIFFERENCE IN TERMS OF THE
CONGRESS I'VE GOT TO DEAL WITH?
AND THEN PEOPLE ARE WONDERING,
"WHY, HOW COME OBAMA HADN'T
GOTTEN THIS DONE?
HOW COME HE DIDN'T GET THAT
DONE?"
WHAT WOULD HAVE HAPPENED IF YOU
HAD TURNED OUT AT 50%, 60%, 70%
ALL ACROSS THIS COUNTRY?
>> Thomspon: PRESUMPTIVE
REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE
DONALD TRUMP CAMPAIGNED TODAY IN
WASHINGTON STATE, WHICH HOLDS
ITS REPUBLICAN PRIMARY MAY 24.
WITH ALL OF HIS RIVALS OUT OF
THE RACE, TRUMP IS WITHIN 170
DELEGATES OF THE NUMBER NEEDED
TO CLINCH THE NOMINATION.
WASHINGTON STATE DEMOCRATS
ALLOCATED BERNIE SANDERS 31 MORE
DELEGATES THAN HILLARY CLINTON
TODAY, FOLLOWING CAUCUSES HE WON
THERE IN MARCH.
EVEN SO, CLINTON NOW HAS 94% OF
THE DELEGATES SHE NEEDS TO WIN
THE PARTY'S NOMINATION.
WEST VIRGINIA HOLDS THE NEXT
DEMOCRATIC PRIMARY THIS TUESDAY.
>> Thompson: A DECADE AGO, WHEN
THE NORTHERN CALIFORNIA CITY OF
RICHMOND HAD THE NINTH WORST
MURDER RATE IN THE UNITED
STATES, THE CITY CAME UP WITH A
NEW APPROACH TO REDUCE GUN
VIOLENCE.
IN ADDITION TO IMPROVING ITS
OUTREACH AND MENTORING, RICHMOND
DECIDED TO HAND OUT CASH
PAYMENTS TO YOUNG MEN-- SOME
WITH CRIMINAL RECORDS-- IN ORDER
TO PERSUADE THEM TO STAY OUT OF
TROUBLE.
NOW, OTHER AMERICAN CITIES ARE
LOOKING TO REPLICATE THE
PROGRAM, CALLED "OPERATION
PEACEMAKER."
FOR TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
I WENT TO RICHMOND TO SEE HOW
THE PROGRAM WORKS.
THIS REPORT IS PART OF OUR
ONGOING SERIES "URBAN IDEAS,"
ABOUT HOW CITIES ARE USING
INNOVATIVE METHODS TO TACKLE
PROBLEMS.
30-YEAR-OLD ROHNELL ROBINSON
GREW UP IN RICHMOND, CALIFORNIA,
JUST NORTHEAST OF SAN FRANCISCO.
THIS INDUSTRIAL CITY OF 100,000
WAS ONCE CONSIDERED ONE OF THE
MOST DANGEROUS CITIES IN THE
NATION.
>> A LOT OF THE STUFF THAT GOES
ON AROUND HERE-- DRUGS,
KILLINGS.
>> Thompson: ROBINSON WAS ONLY
14 WHEN POLICE CAUGHT HIM
SELLING MARIJUANA, THE FIRST OF
MANY RUN-INS WITH THE LAW FOR
DRUGS AND GUN POSSESSION.
HE SAYS MORE THAN TEN FRIENDS
HAVE BEEN KILLED BY THE GUN
VIOLENCE THAT'S PLAGUED
RICHMOND'S URBAN NEIGHBORHOODS.
AND WHAT WAS THAT LIKE, SEEING
THAT AROUND YOU?
>> YOU KIND OF KIND OF GET
IMMUNE TO IT, BECAUSE IT HAPPENS
SO MUCH.
I MEAN, IT'S NOT A GOOD THING.
>> Thompson: DESPITE IT ALL,
ROBINSON GRADUATED FROM HIGH
SCHOOL AND STARTED COLLEGE.
BUT HE SAYS WHEN ONE OF HIS BEST
FRIENDS WAS SHOT TO DEATH, HE
SLID OFF HIS PATH, PLED GUILTY
TO POSSESSION OF A GUN AND SPENT
TWO YEARS IN JAIL AND THREE-AND-
A-HALF ON PROBATION FOR
CONSPIRING WITH A KNOWN GANG
MEMBER.
WHAT WERE YOU DOING WITH THE
GUN?
>> PROTECTION.
YOU SEE SO MUCH STUFF HAPPEN,
AND YOU DON'T WANT TO BE THAT
PERSON.
SO, IT'S PICK UP A GUN OR JUST
BE AROUND AND PROBABLY GET SHOT
WITH NO WAY TO PROTECT YOURSELF.
>> Thompson: WHEN HE GOT OUT, AT
HIS MOTHER'S URGING, ROBINSON
CALLED RICHMOND'S OFFICE OF
NEIGHBORHOOD SAFETY, A CITY
PROGRAM THAT WORKS WITH YOUNG
MEN LIKE HIM WHO POLICE CONSIDER
HIGH-RISK FOR GUN CRIMES.
THE GOAL IS TO KEEP THEM FROM
GETTING INTO TROUBLE AGAIN.
ROBINSON COMMITTED TO A PROGRAM
CALLED "OPERATION PEACEMAKER."
HE WAS REQUIRED TO CREATE A
"LIFE MAP," A SET OF PERSONAL
GOALS.
HE WENT THROUGH DRUG TREATMENT,
AND HE HELD DOWN A JOB AS A
JANITOR, WHICH THE PROGRAM
HELPED PAY FOR.
AND BY DOING ALL OF THAT, AFTER
SIX MONTHS, HE QUALIFIED FOR THE
PROGRAM'S BOLDEST ELEMENT: A
CASH PAYMENT, UP TO $1,000 A
MONTH FOR AS LONG AS NINE
MONTHS.
ROBINSON GOT A MONTHLY STIPEND
FOR THE MAXIMUM NINE MONTHS--
SOMETIMES $1,000, SOMETIMES
LESS, DEPENDING ON HOW HE WAS
DOING ON HIS GOALS.
WHAT DID YOU DO WITH THE MONEY?
>> I ENDED UP GETTING MY FIRST
APARTMENT, CAR, JUST DOING STUFF
THAT NORMAL PEOPLE WOULD DO.
BANK ACCOUNTS.
IT DID A LOT.
IT SHOWS YOU THAT PEOPLE CARE
ABOUT YOU.
>> THE BOTTOM LINE IN THIS WORK
IS, NO SHOOTING.
>> Thompson: DEVONE BOGGAN IS A
MENTOR FOR AT-RISK YOUTH WHO
PREVIOUSLY RAN A SUCCESSFUL
PROGRAM IN OAKLAND, 12 MILES
AWAY.
NINE YEARS AGO, THE CITY OF
RICHMOND, DESPERATE TO TACKLE
CRIME, RECRUITED BOGGAN TO
LAUNCH THE PROGRAM, WHICH BEGAN
AS STREET OUTREACH, A TACTIC
USED WITH SUCCESS IN OTHER
CITIES.
AT THE TIME, RICHMOND'S HOMICIDE
RATE WAS AT A RECORD HIGH.
>> TRY TO IMAGINE GROWING UP IN
A WAR ZONE, BULLETS FLYING.
>> Thompson: RICHMOND POLICE
BELIEVED THAT MOST OF THE
SHOOTINGS COULD BE BLAMED ON
JUST A COUPLE DOZEN YOUNG MEN.
>> IF GUN VIOLENCE IN THIS CITY
WAS TO DECREASE IN ANY KIND OF
WAY, THAT FIRST WOULD HAVE TO
HAPPEN BECAUSE THESE YOUNG MEN
DECIDED THAT IT WOULD DECREASE.
WHY NOT CREATE A DIFFERENT KIND
OF MECHANISM TO COME AT THESE
GUYS FROM A DIFFERENT ANGLE?
>> Thompson: WHEN YOU PAY THEM
THIS STIPEND, ARE YOU JUST, IN A
SENSE, REWARDING BAD BEHAVIOR?
>> EVERY BIT OF THE STIPEND THAT
THEY RECEIVE IS TIED TO AN
ACCOMPLISHMENT ASSOCIATED WITH
THEIR LIFE MAP.
NOW, IF THE QUESTION IS, DO THEY
DESERVE IT?, THAT'S DEBATABLE.
WHY SHOULD THESE YOUNG MEN GET
THAT?
>> Thompson: WHY SHOULD THEY?
I MEAN, THERE'S A LOT OF GUYS
OUT THERE WHO HAVEN'T COMMITTED
CRIMES.
>> BECAUSE THEY NEED IT MORE
THAN THAT GUY.
AND THE COMMUNITIES WHERE THESE
YOUNG MEN LIVE IN AND SHOOT IN
NEED FOR HIM TO GET IT.
>> Thompson: FOR ROHNELL
ROBINSON, THE $1,000-A-MONTH
STIPEND WASN'T ALL.
THERE WERE ALSO EDUCATIONAL
TRIPS ABROAD, CHAPERONED BY
OFFICE OF NEIGHBORHOOD SAFETY
STAFF.
ROBINSON'S BEEN TO LONDON AND
PARIS, AND HAD TO TRAVEL WITH
SOMEONE FROM A RIVAL
NEIGHBORHOOD.
>> COME TO FIND OUT WE LIKE THE
SAME THINGS.
WE KIND OF ACT ALIKE.
WE JUST TWO DUDES FROM DIFFERENT
SIDES OF TOWN.
THAT DON'T MEAN WE'VE GOT TO NOT
LIKE EACH OTHER.
>> Thompson: WHILE RICHMOND'S
OFFICE OF NEIGHBORHOOD SAFETY IS
PAID FOR WITH TAXPAYER DOLLARS,
THE STIPENDS ARE PAID FOR BY
PRIVATE FOUNDATIONS.
THERE'S ALSO INTENSE STREET
OUTREACH.
EVERY DAY, A TEAM OF SIX SO-
CALLED NEIGHBORHOOD CHANGE
AGENTS-- ALL FROM THE COMMUNITY,
AND ALL WITH ARREST RECORDS--
DRIVE THE STREETS, MAKING
CONTACT WITH MEN IDENTIFIED AS
BEING AT-RISK.
>> WE'RE ON OUR WAY TO THE NORTH
RICHMOND PROJECTS.
>> Thompson: JOE McCOY GREW UP
IN THESE PUBLIC HOUSING
PROJECTS.
HE SPENT FOUR YEARS IN JAIL
AFTER PLEADING GUILTY TO SELLING
COCAINE.
>> WHAT'S UP WITH YOU?
HOW YOU DOING, MAN?
>> Thompson: McCOY CHECKS IN
ALMOST DAILY WITH GRADY HUDSON
AND HIS OLDER BROTHER, TROVANTE.
BOTH HAVE BEEN ARRESTED FOR GUN
POSSESSION.
McCOY PESTERS GRADY ABOUT
ATTENDING A LIFE SKILLS CLASS.
>> YOU GOT THERE ON TIME
YESTERDAY LIKE YOU WAS SUPPOSED
TO?
>> YEAH, I GOT THERE ON TIME.
>> Thompson: WHEN GRADY WAS 17,
HE SPENT SIX MONTHS IN JUVENILE
DETENTION FOR BRINGING A GUN TO
SCHOOL.
>> DUE TO TERRITORIAL ISSUES, I
WAS KIND OF SCARED AROUND HERE,
SO I HAD TO PROTECT MYSELF BY
ARMING.
>> Thompson: RICHMOND'S OFFICE
OF NEIGHBORHOOD SAFETY HELPED
GRADY, NOW 19, SIGN UP FOR TEMP
JOBS AND OFFERED HIM A LIFE
SKILLS CLASS TO DEAL WITH ANGER
ISSUES.
BUT GRADY SAYS HE'S GOT MORE TO
WORK ON.
>> MY HEAD IS ELSEWHERE.
IT'S NOT FOCUSED ON SCHOOL
MATERIAL RIGHT NOW.
BUT, LIKE, I'M TRYING TO GET...
I'M TRYING TO GET THAT TOGETHER
AND GET MY DIPLOMA.
>> Thompson: IF HE DOES GET IT
TOGETHER, GRADY COULD BE
ELIGIBLE FOR THE MONTHLY STIPEND
THAT ROHNELL ROBINSON RECEIVED.
>> THE PROGRAM AIMS TO SAVE
LIVES IN A REALLY UNCONVENTIONAL
WAY.
>> Thompson: ALWYNN BROWN IS
RICHMOND'S NEW CHIEF OF POLICE
AND HAS BEEN WITH THE DEPARTMENT
FOR 31 YEARS.
HE SAYS HE SUPPORTS OPERATION
PEACEMAKERS' "UNCONVENTIONAL"
METHODS.
SOME PEOPLE LOOK AT THE
FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM AND THEY
SAY, "COULDN'T WE BE DOING
SOMETHING BETTER WITH THIS
MONEY?"
>> DO YOU WANT TO HAVE, YOU
KNOW, YOUNG PEOPLE WHO'VE BEEN
IDENTIFIED AS BEING FAIRLY
LETHAL OUT DOING WHAT THEY
USUALLY DO, OR DO YOU WANT TO
DISRUPT THOSE KINDS OF LIFE
CHOICES AND HAVE THEM DO
SOMETHING ELSE?
>> Thompson: BROWN ACKNOWLEDGES,
FOR THE NEIGHBORHOOD CHANGE
AGENTS, IT'S ALL ABOUT BUILDING
TRUST WITH THE YOUNG MEN, WHICH
CAN BE DIFFICULT FOR THE POLICE.
>> WE'RE TALKING ABOUT PEOPLE
WHO HAVE GROWN UP LIVING OUTSIDE
THE LAW.
WELL, WE'RE THE LAW.
I MEAN, THAT'S NOT AN EASY
CONNECTION TO MAKE.
>> Thompson: BUT NEIGHBORHOOD
CHANGE AGENTS HAVE A STRICT
RULE-- THEY DON'T SHARE
INFORMATION WITH POLICE.
IS THAT FRUSTRATING FOR YOU?
>> I GET IT.
WE UNDERSTAND THAT THEY NEED TO
HAVE CREDIBILITY WITH THE FOLKS
THAT THEY'RE TRYING TO REACH.
>> Thompson: RICHMOND CITY
COUNCIL MEMBER GAYLE McLAUGHLIN
BECAME MAYOR IN 2007 AND HELPED
CREATE THE OFFICE OF
NEIGHBORHOOD SAFETY WHEN CRIME
WAS SPIKING.
>> I WAS FACING A COUNCIL AT
THAT TIME THAT WANTED TO DECLARE
A STATE OF EMERGENCY EVERY TIME
A SPIKE OF VIOLENCE HAPPENED,
AND BRING IN THE NATIONAL GUARD.
>> Thompson: SHE SAYS THE CITY
NEEDED A NEW APPROACH.
>> SOME COUNCIL MEMBERS WERE NOT
READY TO PUT SOME CITY FUNDING
INTO SUCH A PROGRAM.
THEY WERE TALKING MORE ABOUT
MORE POLICE.
>> Thompson: NOW ON THE CITY
COUNCIL HERSELF, SHE CONTINUES
TO FUND THE OFFICE AND SAYS IT'S
BEEN A SUCCESS.
>> THE VAST MAJORITY OF THE
YOUNG PEOPLE HAVE STAYED OUT OF
TROUBLE.
>> Thompson: 68 MEN HAVE
COMPLETED THE OPERATION
PEACEMAKER FELLOWSHIP SO FAR,
AND, ACCORDING TO THE PROGRAM,
ONLY ABOUT 20% HAVE BEEN
ARRESTED OR CHARGED FOR NEW GUN
CRIMES.
13 WERE CONVICTED AND GOT KICKED
OUT OF THE PROGRAM.
RICHMOND'S CRIME PROBLEM HAS
IMPROVED, TOO, ALTHOUGH IT STILL
HAS ONE OF THE HIGHEST PER
CAPITA MURDER RATES IN THE BAY
AREA.
THE NUMBER OF HOMICIDES HERE IN
RICHMOND HAS DROPPED BY HALF IN
THE LAST DECADE, FROM 42 IN 2006
TO 21 IN 2015.
OTHER CITIES ARE NOW REPLICATING
RICHMOND'S OPERATION PEACEMAKER
PROGRAM, INCLUDING: WASHINGTON,
D.C.; TOLEDO, OHIO; AND OAKLAND,
CALIFORNIA.
IN WASHINGTON, WHICH, UNLIKE
RICHMOND, WOULD USE TAXPAYER
MONEY TO FUND THE STIPENDS, THE
MAYOR HAS SAID SHE OPPOSES THE
IDEA, SAYING RESOURCES SHOULD BE
SPENT INSTEAD ON JOBS PROGRAMS.
OAKLAND CITY OFFICIALS CAME TO
MEET WITH DEVONE BOGGAN ABOUT
THEIR LAUNCH OF THE PROGRAM IN
THE NEXT FEW MONTHS.
BUT MARY THEROUX, SENIOR VICE
PRESIDENT OF THE INDEPENDENT
INSTITUTE IN OAKLAND, A THINK
TANK FOCUSED ON PERSONAL
FREEDOMS, SAYS SHE'S NOT SURE
THE PROGRAM CAN BE CREDITED WITH
THE DROP IN CRIME.
FOR INSTANCE, RICHMOND'S POLICE
DEPARTMENT HAS ALSO OVERHAULED
ITS GUN VIOLENCE STRATEGIES.
>> WE HAD A DECLINE IN CRIME
NATIONALLY IN THE SAME PERIOD.
WE CERTAINLY HAD LOTS OF OTHER
FACTORS.
ECONOMIC FACTORS CAN BE HUGE,
DEMOGRAPHIC FACTORS.
>> Thompson: WHILE THE PROGRAM
DEMANDS THAT FELLOWS MAKE AND
ACHIEVE PERSONAL GOALS, THEROUX
THINKS IT SHOULD GO FURTHER AND
REQUIRE THEM TO HOLD DOWN A JOB
OR FINISH A DEGREE.
>> SO, I THINK IT'S VERY
IMPORTANT THAT WE FIND OUT IF
THIS PROGRAM IS REALLY HELPING
THEM OR IF IT'S JUST ESSENTIALLY
FREEZING THEM IN PLACE, AND IF
THERE ARE OTHER THINGS WE COULD
BE DOING THAT WOULD BE HELPING
THEM MUCH MORE, HAVE MUCH MORE
OPPORTUNITIES.
>> Thompson: DEVONE BOGGAN SAYS,
IN RICHMOND, THAT'S NOT THE
POINT.
>> SUCCESS TO US IS NOT WHETHER
OR NOT HE BECOMES A MODEL
CITIZEN.
SUCCESS, TO US, IS ABOUT WHETHER
OR NOT HE USES A FIREARM TO
ADDRESS CONFLICT.
>> LOOK AT MY LIFE.
IT'S NOT THE GREATEST, BUT THEY
PUT ME... THEY PUT MY MIND FRAME
IN SOMETHING BETTER.
>> Thompson: ROHNELL ROBINSON
LEFT HIS JANITOR JOB AND IS NOW
TRAINING FOR A HIGHER SKILLED
JOB IN THE OIL INDUSTRY.
HE SAYS HE'S LEFT HIS PAST LIFE
OF CRIME BEHIND.
>> IF I THOUGHT THEN HOW I
THOUGHT NOW, I DEFINITELY
WOULDN'T... WOULD HAVE NEVER,
NEVER, EVER PICKED UP A GUN.
>> Thompson: SEE WHAT IT'S LIKE
TO BE AN AMERICAN TOURIST IN
NORTH KOREA.
VIEW A PHOTO ESSAY ONLINE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Thompson: LONDON HAS A NEW
MAYOR AND ITS FIRST WHO IS A
MUSLIM: 45-YEAR-OLD SADIQ KHAN.
THE HUMAN RIGHTS LAWYER AND
LABOR PARTY LEADER IS THE SON OF
PAKISTANI IMMIGRANTS.
HIS FATHER WAS A BUS DRIVER AND
HIS MOTHER WAS A SEAMSTRESS.
WITH ELECTION RESULTS DECLARED
FINAL TODAY, KHAN WAS SWORN INTO
OFFICE AND CELEBRATED HIS WIN AT
A MULTI-DENOMINATIONAL CEREMONY
IN AN ANGLICAN CATHEDRAL.
>> MY NAME IS SADIQ KHAN, AND
I'M THE MAYOR OF LONDON!
>> Thompson: HE SAID HE'LL BE A
MAYOR FOR ALL LONDONERS AND
REPRESENT EVERY COMMUNITY.
JENNY GROSS, A REPORTER FOR THE
"WALL STREET JOURNAL," HAS BEEN
COVERING THE ELECTION AND JOINS
US VIA SKYPE FROM LONDON.
JENNY, ONE MILLION OF LONDON'S
EIGHT MILLION RESIDENTS ARE
MUSLIM, A QUARTER OF THE CITY IS
FOREIGN BORN.
DO THOSE DEMOGRAPHICS AFFECT THE
CAMPAIGN?
>> THE DEMOGRAPHICS IN LONDON
ARE SO DIFFERENT THAN THE REST
OF THE COUNTRY.
SO THAT FOR SURE COULD HAVE BEEN
A REASON, YOU KNOW, GIVING SADIQ
KHAN A BOOST IN THE POLLS BUT I
THINK MOREOVER HE LEAD A
CAMPAIGN THAT APPEALED TO
LONDONERS, OF COURSE, BEYOND
MUSLIMS.
HE WAS ELECTED WITH A HUGE
MANDATE, SOMETHING LIKE 57% OF
VOTES WENT TO HIM IN THE SECOND
ROUND AND 43% WENT TO HIS RIVAL,
THE CONSERVATIVE CANDIDATE.
>> THAT CONSERVATIVE CANDIDATE
SAID SOME THINGS DURING THE
ELECTION THAT SOME PEOPLE
CONSIDERED ISLAMOPHOBIC EVEN
SUGGESTING KHAN WAS SYMPATHETIC
TO ISLAMIC EXTREMISTS.
>> HE TRIED TO LINK KHAN TO
EXTREMISTS BUT IT ENDED UP BACK-
FIRING.
SADIQ KHAN SAID HE SPENT HIS
ENTIRE ADULT LIFE FIGHTING
EXTREMISM, AND, YES, HE HAS
MET WITH UNSAVORY FIGURES IN
THE PAST AS PART OF HIS FORMER
CAREER IN AS A HUMAN RIGHTS
LAWYER.
BUT I THINK, YOU KNOW, JUST WHEN
TALKING TO PEOPLE ON THE STREET
HERE, PEOPLE WERE TURNED OFF BY
THE FACT THAT INSTEAD OF
FOCUSING ON THE ISSUES LIKE
HOUSING AND TRANSPORT, THE
EMPHASIS OF THE CONSERVATIVE
CAMPAIGN SEEMED TO BE ABOUT RACE
AND SADIQ KHAN'S MUSLIM FAITH.
>> ARE THERE SIGNS THAT THOSE
TENSIONS WILL EASE NOW THAT THE
ELECTION IS OVER?
>> I THINK THERE IS A SENSE
AMONG SOME PEOPLE HERE THAT
PEOPLE ARE JUST VERY EXCITED
ABOUT THE FACT THAT LONDON HAS A
MUSLIM MAYOR.
I THINK IT'S SIGNIFICANT IN THAT
HE IS THE FIRST MUSLIM MAYOR IN
A MAJOR WESTERN CAPITOL CITY.
ALSO THAT HE WAS VERY HAPPY THAT
PEOPLE HERE HAD CHOSEN UNITY
OVER FEAR AND DIVISION.
>> EUROPE IN GENERAL HAS BEEN
GRAPPLING WITH RISING ISLAMO-
PHOBIA FOLLOWING THE INFLUX
OF MUSLIM REFUGEES AND ALSO THE
TERROR ATTACKS IN PARIS AND
BRUSSELS.
HOW SIGNIFICANT IS KHAN'S
ELECTION FOR EUROPE IN GENERAL?
>> I THINK IT IS EXTREMELY
SIGNIFICANT AT A TIME OF RISING
ISLAMOPHOBIA HERE IN THE U.K.
IN PARTICULAR, IT'S BEEN A BIG
ISSUE.
WE HAVE SEEN MORE THAN 800 YOUNG
BRITISH MUSLIMS HAVE LEFT THE
COUNTRY TO GO TO SYRIA AND IRAQ
TO JOIN TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS.
SO I MEAN I THINK YOU KNOW, PART
OF KHAN'S CAMPAIGN, HE SAID HE
WAS GOING TO WORK ON FIGHTING
EXTREMISM HERE AND MAKING SURE
THAT EVERYONE IN SOCIETY FELT
INCLUDED.
>> JENNY GROSS, "WALL STREET
JOURNAL" REPORTER, JOINING US
FROM LONDON, THANK YOU SO MUCH
FOR BEING WITH US.
>> THANK YOU.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Thompson: A NEW TEST FOR THE
ZIKA VIRUS PROMISES TO DELIVER
RESULTS WITHIN HOURS INSTEAD OF
DAYS OR WEEKS.
THE TEST-- DEVELOPED BY
RESEARCHERS AT HARVARD, M.I.T.
AND OTHER UNIVERSITIES-- HAS
SENSORS EMBEDDED IN PAPER, WITH
DOTS THAT TURN FROM YELLOW TO
PURPLE WHEN ZIKA IS DETECTED.
THE TEST, WHICH WILL COST ONLY
$1, IS BASED ON TECHNOLOGY USED
PREVIOUSLY TO TEST FOR THE EBOLA
VIRUS.
PREGNANT WOMEN INFECTED WITH
ZIKA, WHICH IS CARRIED BY
MOSQUITOES, CAN GIVE BIRTH TO
BABIES WITH MICROCEPHALY AND
OTHER SEVERE FETAL BRAIN
DEFECTS.
NO WORD YET ON WHEN THE NEW TEST
MIGHT BE AVAILABLE.
ALABAMA CHIEF JUSTICE ROY MOORE
SAYS HE WILL FIGHT TO KEEP HIS
JOB.
MOORE HAS BEEN SUSPENDED AND
FACES REMOVAL FOR ORDERING
ALABAMA JUDGES NOT TO ISSUE
SAME-SEX MARRIAGE LICENSES.
FILING ETHICS CHARGES AGAINST
MOORE YESTERDAY, THE STATE'S
JUDICIAL INQUIRY COMMISSION SAID
HE "FLAGRANTLY DISREGARDED A
FUNDAMENTAL CONSTITUTIONAL
RIGHT" ESTABLISHED BY THE U.S.
SUPREME COURT LAST YEAR.
MOORE SAYS THE COMMISSION HAS NO
AUTHORITY OVER HIS ORDERS.
HE WAS PREVIOUSLY REMOVED AS
CHIEF JUSTICE IN 2003 AFTER
REFUSING TO REMOVE A TEN
COMMANDMENTS MONUMENT FROM A
STATE JUDICIAL BUILDING, BUT HE
WAS RE-ELECTED IN 2012.
ON TOMORROW'S PROGRAM, THE HIT
BROADWAY SHOW "HAMILTON" WAS
NOMINATED THIS WEEK FOR A RECORD
16 TONY AWARDS, INCLUDING BEST
MUSICAL.
WE'LL REPORT ON HOW "HAMILTON"
IS CHANGING THE WAY HISTORY IS
BEING TAUGHT IN THE CLASSROOM.
>> I ENJOY MUSIC A LOT, MAINLY
HIP-HOP AND RAP AND EVERYTHING.
SO HAVING IT BE DISPLAYED TO ME
THIS WAY, IT STUCK IN MY HEAD.
>> I THINK THEY FEEL LIKE WHAT
WE DO HERE IS SORT OF OUTDATED.
AND GIVING THE KIDS THOSE KINDS
OF OPTIONS, JUST TO ME MAKES
EDUCATION SEEM RELEVANT.
>> BIGGER, BIGGER.
TRY IT AGAIN.
>>  HE RESIDED IN ST. CROIX.
HE WAS JUST A LITTLE BOY.
>> AND FINALLY, YOU CAN STAY UP
TO DATE ON THE MASSIVE WILDFIRE
IN FORT McMURRAY, CANADA.
VISIT US ONLINE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M MEGAN THOMPSON.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.